this is the 100th episode of the Dr Goo
podcast before we begin with our special
guest I just want to say thank you you
know I'm
humbled every day when I see the
subscriber amount clicking away on the
YouTube channel over 20,000
subscribers I am humbled when you come
to my website the Dr Goo website and you
want to become a member of that
Community you are an important member of
My Tribe I spend tireless hours figuring
out what information do you need to know
in the world of Urology and Men's Health
uh in the world of prostate cancer for
the newly diagnosed for the man who is
on Androgen deprivation therapy with
Advanced prostate cancer those with are
recurrence those with bone metastasis
for men with prostate problems uh that
are benign that are affecting a urinary
function and your quality of life guys
with low testosterone and erectile
dysfunction which there again affects
quality of
life thank you so much I am in so much
gratitude to you for being such a
proactive member of my community for
commenting for subscribing all these
things matter matters to me because then
the algorithms work in my favor and in
the favor of this podcast but most
importantly it matters because we want
to get this information out to as many
people as possible we want to get this
very important content out so that men
can be proactive in their own health
care these are the
self-empowered health Advocates that we
talk about and practitioners who are
also listeners and active participants
here practitioners who want to get it
right as it relates to All Things
Urological health and mental health I'm
I am again so touched by you all and
thank you lastly I also want to thank
those experts that taken time out from
their busy schedule to be on this
podcast you know I always say that with
those that have interviewed those that
have been my guests on this podcast I
would love to have coffee with them on
any given day to talk about talk shop on
their expertise but that never happens
because everybody has a life everybody's
busy but they've said yes to me uh and
they've said yes to this podcast and to
be on so I am in gratitude to my
interviewees and the experts that have
come on and those that have yet to come
in the future thank you so much today's
guest is Dr Thomas seed Dr C freed is
one that you've asked me to have him on
many of you have said when are you going
to have Dr C freed on and here he is Dr
Thomas seed is a professor of biology at
Boston College he has published in over
200 peer review journals and he has
written the very popular book cancer as
a metabolic disease on the origin
management and prevention of cancer by
Wy press in this conversation with Dr C
freed we talk about all things
metabolism as it relates to prostate
cancer
specifically he definitely opened up my
eyes as to the potential approaches to
prostate cancer from a ketogenic
perspective and the metabolism of
prostate cancer things that I was not
quite aware of at least based on the
research that I read Dr caed is a I
wouldn't say Pioneer in this field of
metabolism of cancer because probably
out of warberg was and Dr caed chose uh
34 40 years ago to bring about this
research from the
1940s
and open it up to possibilities on how
people can manage their cancer we focus
100% around prostate cancer and the
metabolism of prostate cancer with the
one and only Dr Thomas sea freed let's
go
[Music]
I am your host Dr Gio where it is my
intention and my goal to help you with
your prostate health things related to
testosterone erections how they all come
together and how to live better with age
as you know as my as my audience I run
prostate cancer and many of you have
asked when are you going to get Dr C
freed on well your request has been
answered SE freed on the podcast Tom
thank you so much and thank you for
allowing me to call you Tom I like to
reor professionals they doctor or Mister
but uh we're a little bit more laidback
on the podcast so thank you for being on
U we'll we'll get a good conversation
going Tom take us back your your work
has revolutionized how cancer is looked
at by many some may agree some may
disagree but the bottom line is that
many people are applying your Concepts
um whether they're doing it with their
work or they're doing it Clinic it with
writing of their own books on on the
metabolism of cancer how far back are we
talking about what led you to probably
devote your life I don't know prior to
devoting your life on cancer you did
some other work you had another
specialty but what inspired you to say
look this is a good area to focus on and
let's bring back that warberg theory on
cancer that uh was known uh you know
during before World War II so take us
back and bring us forward as to what
what's the evolution of cancer from a Dr
sea freed perspective and study and
research well Gio it's not a straight
path by any stretch of the imagination
what do you think I woke up one day and
said we're going to manage cancer
effectively is a metabolic disease and
all the crazy stuff we're doing is
Medieval no it didn't happen that way
right right that's where it is today no
I mean I I have a master's degree in
genetics uh from Illinois State
University in classical mutagenic
genetics and I then I followed up with a
PhD in genetics and biochemistry from
the University of Illinois in Urbana
champagne Urbana and then I did a postto
at um Yale University and then became
part of the faculty there in the
Department of
Neurology and at that time Dr Gilbert
Glasser was the the chairman and he was
one of the world's leaders in the field
of epilepsy so I came to Yale with the
hope of doing research on
glycosphingolipid function isolation
pure ification and Analysis with Dr the
late Dr Robert U and he was the best in
the world at at doing this and we were
looking at various neurological
diseases um and the genetics but he told
me that if you want to stay at Yale you
better do something with epilepsy
because the whole program here is
epilepsy so I started looking at
seizures in these epileptic mice because
I had a Maman genetics background and we
were looking at audiogenic seizures and
these kinds of things and uh at the same
time we were looking at the the
glycolipid biochemistry and the problems
you know at that time and and and I
wrote a internal Grant on ketogenic
diets for for epilepsy I said it might
work on some of these Mouse models oh no
nobody's interested in yet ketogenic
diets pass a we don't we don't get
excited about that that was from the
1920s so I said all right so I'll I'll
just stick with the the ganglio sides
and and then uh we started looking at
some cancer Bob you was looking at some
brain tumors with gangli sdes G glyos
finger lipids so I started looking at
retina and brain cancer and just just
biochemist just what we call Smash and B
grab all everything as it related to
ketogenic diet or unrelated at that time
just related to the pure structural
biochemistry and function of what a
group of glycolipids does in the brain
nobody knew what what the hell these
things did uh and I Quantified and
isolated and purified what we call Brute
Force biochemistry according to
traditional structural biochemistry and
but at the same time I was dabbling
around in the epilepsy stuff and the map
genes that controlled epileptic seizures
this is so we were doing gangly side
biochemistry and then of course I had a
couple of brain tumor uh samples I had
some mice that I I made some mice that
that would develop brain tumors with
some chemical carcinogen so we could get
a better idea what of what gangliosides
might do in brain cancer but from a pure
structural biochemistry not not any kind
of management or anything wasn't related
to that I I was doing what almost 95 I
would say what 90% of other people who
do re research in cancer is just do
research in cancer whether it has any
practical benefit for anybody it doesn't
matter and no one cares grants yeah and
as long as you keep writing your papers
and getting grants who cares if it
translates to you know improving human
life yeah your your goal was just to get
the next Grant to study to study more
right so and uh you know at that time I
was building all these beautiful brain
cancer models to understand gangli sides
um and then I I I was assistant
professor there and then a nice position
opened up at Boston College um and I
brought my entire research program up
they were very excited you know NIH and
NSF grants and mapping epilepsy genes
everybody was all excited and then doing
that for several years ganglio sdes
brain biochemistry and epilepsy and then
one of my students came to me one day
back I think in the 9s the 1990s and she
said oh they're having a big meeting in
the west coast on ketogenic diets run by
Jim Abrams who was the movie maker at
the time he made the these funny movies
you know he did mer with Merill Streep
he made first Do no harm and then he and
then he made these Naked Gun kind of
movies they were classic funny movies so
anyway his son Charlie had retractable
epilepsy he and he Charlie almost passed
away from all the SE all the drugs and
all the kinds of crazy stuff and then he
met my former colleague the the down at
Johns hopins the groups the groups
Freeman who was the one of the few guys
on the planet that continued to push the
ketogenic diet for epilepsy so anyway
Mariana my student came back and she
said oh my God they're so interested in
this ketogenic diet and oh you should
see this everybody and I said nobody
cares about the ketogenic diet but I my
the big shots at Yale when I was there
with the the leaders in the field of
epilepsy said it was p and then Mariana
told me oh no no there's a lot of
interest in this Jim Abrams this movie
guy is is creating a lot more interest
because of his son Charlie so I said
okay we'll start looking at all these
Mouse models of epilepsy I I said we're
looking at these genes we can't find
them we mapped genes for epilepsy didn't
mean anything then what I did is I put
the mouse on the ketogenic diet said
damn these all of a sudden the seizures
disappear and the mice are doing well
and I said wo this is really maybe
there's something to this and sure
enough we switched I said didn't make
any difference what kind of mutation was
linked to the epileptic seizures when
you put the mice on these uh ketogenic
diets they seemed to stop seizing and it
didn't make any difference what kind of
seizure at and then we realized it was
calorie restricted ketogen it wasn't so
then I took High carbohydrate diet and
and gave it in a fasting state to the
mouse and it worked just as well as the
ketogenic diet so I said what the hell
is going on with that and the key to
working was was lowering the blood sugar
and elevating the ketones which was
managing epilepsy now we were having a
parallel program in brain cancer on
biochemistry if you have two parallel
programs all of a sudden they cross
paths so and then I said we put some of
these mice I'll tell you what happened
it was really really funny we this drug
company came to me they had this
molecule that stopped ganglioside
biosynthesis and they were interested in
knowing the mechanisms by which this new
molecule it was called nbut deoxy nyin
it's not relevant but anything anything
almost everything that comes into my lab
we throw it either on an epileptic mouse
or a tumor
Mouse well and then we said that gave we
gave the drug to the animal with the
brain
tumor and lo and behold it Shrunk the
brain tumor wow so the I told the drug
company because they had given us I
don't know $5,000 or something to look
at this drug and then I said to them you
know this drug with this
anti-ganglioside synthesis inhibitor
shrunk these aggressive gomas in half
more than half while the drug company
guy who was in the cancer field one of
these pharmaceutical cancer guys oh this
is he says just name your price I'm
writing you out a check so he he gave me
a little over
$200,000 back in 90 19 about 956
somewhere in that area to figure out not
insignificant yeah yeah so I hired Dr
muker who's working with me today oh is
that right oh yeah so this was 1998 yeah
because she started 1998 so she's been
with me all this time and and she knew
about angiogenesis and this kind of
thing and tumors and I said well we got
to hire somebody that knows something
about you know so we started looking at
this drug and the company was all like
whoa this is going to be a blockbuster
we get a a nice drug that blocks the Sy
is of these glycolipids in the brain at
the same time shrinks the tumors this is
a
blockbuster so we started giving the
mice this drug we noticed that their
body weights were getting smaller and
the but the guys were eating they
constantly eating but their body weights
were getting smaller so I said to Perna
says a couple of says we got to put in a
control group we got we got to take the
food away from another group of mouse
that don't get the drug but just match
the body weight with the guys that eat
the drug and sure enough the tumor
shrunk just as well in the guys that got
the food restriction as it did in the
the drug group so the control group the
intention of the control group was to
have them not be in a drug but not to
eat anything yeah just eat regular lab
Chow because the guys the guys that were
getting the drug were were we powdered
the lab chow and we put the drug in the
powdered lab Chow yeah so we then gave
the other guys just powdered lab Chow
without the drug right and but we cut we
cut the Chow restricted theow Chow to
match the body weight of the guys
getting the Chow with the drug because
the guys were losing body weight right
okay so now I had two body weight
control groups and that we the tumor
shrunk to the exact same size as the
guys are getting the drug and so the
placebo was as effective as the as the
experimental drug yeah so we found out
later on that the damn drug blocked
sucres in the stomach so the mice were
eating the food but they couldn't get
the the the glucose out of the food they
was not being
digested so the so both groups became
ketogenic yes for different reasons for
different reasons right and then you
said wait a minute there's something
here no there's something here but not
only that the drug did work it Shrunk
The ganglioside biosynthesis down as
well but but it wasn't that it the drug
worked exactly as it was supposed to but
from but shrinking a tumor from an
entirely different mechanism right so
then so then what question did you ask
then I said you know then perner was
with me and I said well what is this uh
drug and diet doing to the architecture
of the tumor and it Shrunk the blood
vessels down and it did all this kind of
stuff and at that time in the cancer
field anti-angiogenic therapies were
like the biggest thing hot oh that was
hot everything I always say in cancer
everything is always hot but progress
towards the Cure is cold as ice it's
true it's true I know it's terrible it's
terrible unfortunately yeah oh it's
terrible so anyway we were right in the
crest of all this excitement the drug
working and all this kind of crazy stuff
and and then you know we started looking
at the tumors and and and then we
measured the blood sugar because we knew
the ketogenic diets were lowering blood
sugar and elevating ketones and the guys
that were getting the calorie restricted
High carbohydrate hadow low blood sugar
and elevated ketones I'm saying what's
going on with that and then we realized
that Lindon nebling was the first one to
give two little hopeless case children
with had brain tumors a ketogenic diet
at Case Western Reserve she did it as a
PhD student and she said she alerted us
to the effect of a ketogenic diet might
work through the mechanism that OT
warberg had said back in the 1920s that
the tumors needed sugar they needed
glucose to grow and ketogenic diets
lowered glucose and elevated ketones and
I had been working with epilepsy for a
long time working with some of the best
and we lower that's the way the
epileptic it works for epilepsy it lower
sugar and Elevate ketones the mechanism
is not yet clear by how ketogenic diets
stop epileptic seizures very complicated
with the brain neural circuitry but then
for warberg saying well these tumor
cells they have they need a lot of sugar
to grow so we started doing a big
research on what this guy outo warberg
and then we didn't re we realize this
was the giant biochemist from the 20th
century a very colorful character Hitler
yeah who who's this Auto warberg I can
see you who's this Auto warber guy yeah
well well no everybody in
Biochemistry here's the name otberg
right the question we have everybody's
using wber apparatuses and doing all
this
so with the name of course we all heard
warberg but you know we never knew what
the hell this guy really did and what he
was so famous for right and he got a
Nobel Prize in 1931 for discovery of the
the respiratory enzyme which was
cytochrome C everybody thinks he got a
Nobel Prize for cancer no he was
nominated and then he was Hitler said no
Jew can get or no German uh can get uh
Nobel Prize so even though he had been
nominated I think two other times he has
only one he only had one but he
discovered the key enzyme for oxidative
respiration um but he was noticing that
all the tumors that he looked at had
reduced oxygen consumption and a lot of
lactic acid which what you see when you
suffocate something you get a lactic
acid builds up in the bloodstream
because you're not respiring anymore so
you get tremendous amount but when you
start breathing the lactic acid goes
away and warberg noticed that unlike
normal cells cancer cells continue to P
pump out this lactic acid even in the
presence of 100% oxygen this was very
very unusual because Normal cells in
oxygen produce very little of any lactic
acid yet these cancer cells are still
throwing this out and he looked at
hundreds and hundreds of mouse and rat
and human cancers they all did the same
thing and then he said there must be
something wrong with the mitochondria
having discovered the oxidative enzyme
in the mitochondria he said there has to
be some abnormality in oxidative
phosphor causing the cancer cells to
persist with this fermentation mechanism
and then we did a dive we did a big
lipid study because I'm a lipid
biochemist and we started looking at the
critical lipid in the inner membrane of
the mitochondria which is cardiol lippin
which controls the function of the
electron transport chain we found every
Cancer that we looked at had all kinds
of abnormalities in the structure and
function of this super important lipid
that allows the proteins of the electron
transport chain to operate
efficiently and we published a big paper
we have direct evidence supporting Oto
warberg theory of a mitochondrial
problem being responsible for the
fermentation this went over like a lead
balloon in the cancer uh field everybody
thinks cancer is a genetic disease of
course and they never heard of what the
hell a cardiol lippin is what the hell
is cardio what's a cardiio lippin they
never heard they know what's a cardiol
liid and what's the mitochondria yeah I
remember in fifth grade Powerhouse of
the cell but that's it like what else is
there no so that what they argued was
that oh warberg was completely wrong
cancer cells can take in as much oxygen
as normal cells and all normal cells
proliferating will produce lactic acid
there's nothing special about about what
warberg had said and and therefore he
was and also they are all convinced that
enogen were causing the problems in the
mitochondria so their idea was cancer
was a genetic disease the indoctrinated
brainwashed view that the entire cancer
field has and still had and still has
that cancer is a is a somatic disease of
somatic mutations enogen and tumor
suppressor genes and you know anog genes
hif1 Alpha Mick and all these things
they're the ones that make the tumor
want to use fermentation rather than so
it was theological arguments thrown in
there it was like a big mess and then
and then Sydney win housee who was the
head of the National Cancer Institute
back in the 50s said warberg was
completely wrong because we have all of
these tumors suck in oxygen just as
readily as normal cells and what they
did was they they piled all together rat
tumors Mouse tumors and and human tumors
and did average of all of them and when
you do that the average of the tumors
from those organisms and the normal
tissues they all look the same you got
to compare Mouse with mouse rat with rat
human with human you can't Bunch them
all together and and and it was a very
interesting thing because the field ran
off the cliff looking for genes with
after the Watson and Crick discovery of
the structure of DNA and it was much
excitement about and then they found
broken chromosomes and cancer and they
said oh this is the this is the the the
the Avenue this is where it's at cancer
cells are out of control because of
these mutations and you could now
quantify the mutations and Link it to
the different co uh Cancers and so
warberg was pretty much left behind it
was confusing why is that um I know he
was an esoteric person he he had a a
different style than most um somehow Sur
survived in Germany as a Jew standing is
because uh Hitler had a particular
interest in cancer because of with his
mother why did his did his work die
until you brought it to to light well
it's true because when I first got into
warberg I saw his seminal 1956 paper and
at that time it had 400 citations which
wasn't much for the first discovery of
the origin of cancer
right so the Hanahan and Weinberg papers
that came out in the year
2000 and in
2011 have over
75,000 citations describing cancer as a
genetic disease and warberg was
describing cancer as a metabolic disease
a problem with the oxidative
phosphorilation so you know I started to
go back in the in the history of of
biochemistry of cancer and all the
controversy about the oxygen consumption
and the lactic acid production most of
the people supported at that time what
warberg was saying with the exception of
a few who had some serious and valid
questions that were not was not possible
to answer at that particular time and no
one knew uh about our Discovery uh that
glutamine is fermented along with the
glucose and and this today is still uh
not known or accepted uh by the majority
of people that work in cancer metabolism
they all know glutamine is a major fuel
for cancer but they think it's respired
not fermented wrong it's fermented we
have the direct evidence the strongest
evidence to support that and warberg
knew nothing about the glutamine issue
so they were saying oh some cancer cells
can grow like crazy without glutose how
do you explain that warberg and they're
driving the glut they're fermenting the
glutamine which he didn't know anything
about at the time so but anyway it was a
big back he said she said this company
that all these things and they all ran
off chasing genes and and then the
genome Atlas and and all of these things
and say we're going to cure cancer once
we find the key driver gene mutations
that are leading to the disregulated
cell growth so the National Cancer
Institute actually the NCI was working
pretty much independently on these
problems up until
1984 when because Nixon came out 1971
saying we need to cure cancer we have
the war he declared the war on cancer
just like Johnson declared the war on
poverty so uh whenever you have a war
then you can have a battle and you can
feel like you're fighting something so
we had the war on cancer started in 1971
pushed by Mary Lasker who was an
advocate for the cancer industry at that
time but the progress wasn't good and 19
you know people are saying gez you NIH
you're spending all this money and time
you haven't found the Cure yet so the
way we're going to find the Cure is
we're going to invite the pharmaceutical
industry into the labs that at the an
National Cancer Institute with the hope
of accelerating the search for the Cure
this is unbelievable so you let the you
let the fox into the hen house in
1984 right where the where the mission
was not to cure cancer was to make money
as long as you could on on pushing the
every now and then new hot thing new hot
thing didn't work new hot thing didn't
work in the meantime everybody's making
money Handover fist on these new drugs
the angiogenesis drugs the immunotherapy
drugs imuno ology anti-angiogenic
everybody's all excited about all this
stuff and all we got for it is more dead
cancer patients and and that's clear
right today we have just about 1,700
people a day dying from cancer in the
United States a day it's over 600,000 a
year and then when you break it down to
hour we got about 70 people an hour
dying from cancer in the United States
and we spent billions and billions of
dollars searching for the Precision drug
that's going to Target the mutation on
the cancer cell and all this kind of
crap so so he said quite a few things
and let's unpack some of it
um you've said and generalized cancer I
think we we would agree that not all
cancers are the same because not all
prostate cancer is the same so if not
all prostate cancer is exactly the same
no maybe not all cancer is the same I'll
let I'll pause there and let you speak
on that yeah that's not we've we' we've
tested this okay even so all cancers are
the same no there put it this way all
cancers are driven by a fermentation
metabolism that's their common phenotype
no matter what kind of cancer it is
fermentate can you expand on that
fermentation metabol so most of our
listeners are self- Health Advocates
they're not practitioners or scientists
so let's break that down a little bit
okay so what I mean by that is they get
energy without oxygen and that's the
common phenotype characteristic of all
cancer cells they can't grow without a
fer using using fermentation which is a
non energy making energy ATP synthesis
without oxygen that's one of the unique
characteristics of of Cancer all cancers
we haven't found one that we have I have
a $100 bill in my pocket and I've been
asking my students for the last five
years show me a cancer cell that can drw
grow without fermentation and so far we
have not yet found one and I'll offer it
to any one of your listeners I'll be
happy to relinquish a $100 bill if
anybody and that includes prostate
cancer those cancer cells cannot grow
without the fermentation of glucose and
glutamine period and I I had some
oncologists some of my friends actually
uh who told me I don't believe it can uh
prostate cancer is different from other
cancers and I said I have some clear
studies here showing that the
mitochondria and prostate cancer is
abnormal structurally and in in
evolutionary biology we know structure
determines function and we know prostate
cancers can't live without certain
fermentable fuels and he says I I don't
think that's true so my colleague George
George U is a an oncologist and prostate
cancer he says I have cancer patients
coming into my my clinic all the time I
says George take some tissue from them
because he works with colleagues at
John's Hopkins and I said why don't you
turn it over that the because you can't
see you can't see mitochondria without
clearly without an electron microscopy
so you have to have an electron
microscopy Suite to really see what a
mitochondria looks like in a prostate or
any cancer for that matter so I had done
a big dive on this and I took years to
go through all the electron microscopy
work when that was hot in the 1950s 60s
and 70s a lot of these guys were not
asking fundamental questions they were
just looking at structural stuff and I
saw all these electron microscopy of all
these different cancers with
abnormalities in the number structure
and even functional assays were abnormal
and I looked at prostate cancer too and
I had a couple of papers there from
prostate can George said I don't believe
it I don't believe it oh what the hell I
look at oh no they didn't do it right so
I said okay so he sends his prostate
cancer tissue to John's Hopkins and they
do it come back with some Beau beauti
beautiful slides showing abnormal
mitochondria in the prostate cancer and
then he said now okay now I believe
you you have to you have to see the
evidence and not only that we saw lipid
droplet accumulation all major cancers
have lipid drop accumulation in the
cytoplasm because the mitochondria
defective and they can't use lipids and
we saw the same thing in the prostate
cancer they can't use lipids so they
store them as lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm is exactly what you'd expect
finally he says okay it's like you know
I've seen it on I believe it now because
I have seen it on my own patient's
tissue now he says okay now I I I agree
and I and I so I did all this stuff I
looked at prostate cancer I look at
brain cancer colon cancer bladder cancer
breast cancer you go up and down the
even the blood cancers all the blood
cancers have defective oxidative
phosphorilation so so now we know when
you say defective oxidative
phosphorization um that involves the
mitochondria expand on that a little bit
because it's a very key important
concept yeah but well in the
mitochondria we have chiste these are
the infolding of the inner that's why
the mitochondria is a beautiful
structure it has all these Stripes uh
beautiful stripes in in in the internal
in the inside of the Mito it's a bean
shape but it's actually like a spaghetti
Network it fuses and fizzes it's a it's
a second organism living inside of our
cells it has its own DNA it actually
controls the the the the the quiescent
differentiated state of the cell it
controls the life cycle of that cell
controls the cyclin all from the proton
mode of gradient in the chiste of the
mitochondria okay so when you look at
mitochondria of cancer cells you often
find ghost uh MIT we call ghost
mitochondria Chris they aren't there so
how the hell are you going to get energy
from oxygen the damn structure itself is
not there so in order to stay alive it
has to ferment because it if if so at
warberg said a very important thing he
said if you damage oxidative
phosphorilation that is the way the
mitochondria generate massive amounts of
energy from oxygen if you damage that
too acutely you will kill the cell and
it can never become a cancer in order to
get cancer you have to chronically
interfere with oxidate to
phosphorilation energy through oxygen
bit by bit year by year months by and
eventually every time this inefficiency
is introduced or hit the cancer cell it
it starts to upregulate it's a very
interesting thing the mitochondria in
the cell controls what goes on in that
cell and if something happens to the
energy production the
mitochondria immediately almost
instantaneously signals the nucleus of
the cell to turn on Transporters for
glucose and glutamine and what those
Transporters see if you have a highly
efficient Energy System and that Energy
System becomes slightly less efficient
you have to make up the energy because
otherwise the cell's going to die so we
evolve
to upregulate fermentation
dramatically when oxidative
phosphorilation is interrupted and the
best example of this is when people have
heart attacks Cardiac Arrest all of a
sudden in your bloodstream you see
massive amounts of lactic acid and
succinic acid and those are the two
waste products of fermentation
Metabolism from glucose and glutamine
the cancer field never put that together
I put that together so with some other
work as well so what's happening is that
the cancer cell is constantly making
lactic acid and succinic acid because
the organel needed to generate efficient
energy is inefficient so in order for
and then once that happens the organel
that controls the life cycle and state
of dorcy and res and and and fer and
differentiation loses the grip and the
cell driven by fermentation falls back
on the way cells were before oxygen came
into the atmosphere 2.5 billion years
ago we had a lot of things living on the
planet before we had oxygen and they
were all fermentors they there was no
oxygen so you couldn't use oxygen to
generate energy so there was a transfer
of phosphate groups from organic
molecules and you got ATP but those
cells grew uncontrolled they were no
control cancer is cell division out of
control the cells that existed on the
planet before oxygen were cell division
out of control and they would die when
there was no more fermentable fuels
that's the way they they just grew if
there was plenty of fation fuel they
would grow and divide uncontrollably and
as that fuel disappeared they would die
the cancer cells are simply falling back
uh on these ancient fermentation
Pathways and they're they don't the the
organel controlling the cell cycle is
gone so you don't you don't self
destruct like apoptosis program cell
death no we can't do that because the
organel controlling the kill switch the
kill switch is broken so these cells are
just growing out of control and they're
creating an environment that looks the
body looks at as a wound wow what's
going on with these cells they're
damaging the micro environment so our
immune system comes in to look at why
why these cells are growing out of
control because that's if I stab myself
I I would I would get a a wound and the
immune system would come in to kill
bacteria and and so they throw growth
factors and all these things to try to
facilitate wound healing which is in
cancer is the wrong Conta you shouldn't
do that you shouldn't do that but these
mindless immune cells have no clue they
just respond by evolutionary programs so
they're throwing gasoline on top of this
fire normally they would heal the wound
cause a scar and every they would leave
and the micro environment would be would
be F but if you're throwing out lactic
acid and succinic acid it serves as a c
to the immune system say we got an
unhealed wound here so they come in and
all of a sudden these cancer cells start
growing more and more and what happens
is the immune system is designed to fuse
with if you don't if you don't do what
we what we designed to do we actually
fuse with each other we can fuse with
all these cells to facilitate wound
healing which then creates the
metastatic cancer because these cancers
that start initially are not met most of
them are not metastatic because they
don't have the cap macrofagos are the
the the protector cells in our body they
they are like the state militia you get
something wrong they come right out of
the bloodstream they go into to cure
they go into to manage all of a sudden
these cells are coming into this
cancerous growth thinking that it's a
wound they're doing what their mindless
program is to do to heal wounds but it's
in the wrong context causing these cells
to grow more and once that fusion fusion
happens you have bad mitochondria now in
a genome of a maccrage which already is
genetically programmed to intravasate
extravasate the bloodstreams spread all
over the body so basically what a cancer
cell metastatic cancer cell is a rogue
macras and we know what they need they
need glucose and glutamine and we did
that we interrogated all these cells so
once you know the biology of the system
and the mitochondria gradually losing
control of of the differentiated State
these cells now morph back into this
disregulated growth driven by ancient
fermentation Pathways and we've clearly
shown that these F warberg clearly
showed that glucose is fermented to
lactic acid even in the presence of
oxygen well that shouldn't be if you
have normal healthy mitochondria the
that lactic acid should stop and when
the person has a heart attack and you
see lactic acid and succinic acid going
through the roof and all of a sudden
somebody gives them heart resuscitation
they start breathing lactic acid and
succinic acid go away why because the
cells are respiring again but cancer
cells are locked into this fermentation
because the very organal controlling
that is
dysfunctional wow fascinating that this
is a a mini master class on how cancer
develops and progresses and once again
to be clear your research your
perspective this is all cancer cells
they they all function in a very similar
fash this is a a difficult pill for the
field to
swallow they say they yeah because
because they look at the Cancer genetics
well Co prostate cancer is a different
genetics than the colon the breast and
all but but they're all fermentors
forget about the genes the and the same
fermenting process of glucose and
glutamine yes and some prostate cancers
ferment glutamine more than glucose you
won't see it on a pet scan so so you can
explain you can explain all this stuff
and uh that the warberg effect and the
effects of the modos that most people
present is example of when you do an fdg
that's a glucose pet scan cancer cells
show up that is not the case in prostate
cancer yeah and where so ftg pet scans
are not great no uh for P for prostate
cancer and you're saying because there's
more ration of glutamine and not I think
that could be the case but when we look
at prostate cancer they they they are
fermenting lactic acid and Su inic acid
uh and besides the prostate cancer cells
in the prostate gland itself are kind of
indolent they already look like they're
half cancer anyway so you know it's it's
a it's a kind of an unusual organ and
you know and when we look that but we
look at the mitochondria because that's
ultimately the key to what the the core
of what the problem is if I were to if
you were to say if I saw normal looking
mitochondria and prostate cancer uh
growing in Vivo and then I would look at
them in culture and they didn't need
glucose and glutamine to grow then I
would say this is a a a violation of the
warberg theory and my and our
understanding of how cancer arises and
we have not found that uh you can take
any cancer cell prostate cancer and grow
it the in the culture dish if it doesn't
have glucose or glutamine it's going to
die and you give it glucose and
glutamine back and then as you said some
people say oh no prostate cancer uses
fatty acids oh yeah as long as glucose
and glut are in the the dish you take
the glucose and glutamine leave the
fatty acids they're dead now what what's
interesting is fatty acids are
uncoupling agents this was known for
years in Biochemistry what does that
mean okay when you give fatty acids you
actually uncoupled the mitochondrial
membrane allowing protons to move into
the Matrix dissipating energy through
oxidative phosphorilation so uh and then
if you and normally you would die but if
there's glucose and glutamine in there
you can actually facilitate the use of
glucose and glutamine by fatty acids so
when people grow the cancer cells and
glucose and gluten give the oh look at
the prostate look at the cells grow much
faster with the fatty acids yeah because
they're uncoupling forcing more glucose
and glutamine driving the disregulated
cell growth you got to know the
biochemistry of biochemistry all this to
put this together but but uh we've known
in BIO the problem is in Biochemistry
all of this stuff is clear but nobody's
when you go to the cancer field it's
like they never heard of any of this
stuff they've been chasing genes they've
been chasing the wrong things and
therefore they're not focusing on the
right things and what what's the result
1700 people a day are dying because the
field is focusing on the and where are
the genes come from the mutations when
the mitochondria oxidative
phosphorilation is defective they throw
out rea of oxygen species R which are
carcinogenic and mutogenic so the
mutations we see in the nucleus that
everybody's focused on are Downstream
effects of the dysfunctional oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondri
unbelievable fascinating it is
believable because I did the studies
myself once again for clarity purposes
everybody says well you're genetically
predisposed to X cancer and you're
saying there is no such thing that is
only if you're mitochondrially a word
that I just made up I don't know if it's
a good word uh it you're more
mitochondrially higher risk of
developing prostate cancer so this thing
that we do that I do uh family medical
history genetic uh genetic
predisposition no are we looking are we
looking at the wrong tree no no no you
have to you have to incorporate that you
have to incorporate that now there's a
there are genes that put us at risk for
can they're not primary causes we call
secondary causes like braa one you hear
about the and braa 2 and prostate cancer
yeah yeah right okay we've checked all
those mutations every known genetic germ
line that's not somatic now yeah there's
two kinds of mutations the ones that are
acquired during the the cancer process
and the germline mutations that are risk
factors passed on by your parents passed
on by your parents but none of them
there is primary and secondary risk
factors a primary risk factor is every
time you have that you will manifest the
condition an example is like
Huntington's disease I use that because
anyone that would have the m mut ation
and hunting tin will develop brain
degeneration and demension all this kind
of stuff there's no exceptions cystic
fibrosis tax disease these are primary
causes of the phenotype of the disorder
we have never found in a germ a germline
risk factor that's 100% penetrant
meaning that everybody who has that Gene
will manifest the phenotype and we have
never seen the highest one was Leaf
rameni which was about 80% penetrant the
the bra ones and these things are about
45 to 60% penetrant meaning about you
know 40% of people having the mutation
never develop the tumor but everyone
that has the tumor has mitochondrial
defect they have abnormalities in the
mitochondria why the mutation causes a
mitochondrial defect in that person and
the same person has same another same
gene and this person doesn't have it we
don't know the answer to that it could
be a suppressor gene or whatever it is
all we know is that epigenetics well
epigenetics is a term that people speak
of about only because uh it's a very
complicated thing and nobody can
challenge them on anything oh yeah it's
epigenetics okay well well you know
maybe it is maybe it's not and the most
powerful thing epigenetic system in the
cell is the mitochondria it controls the
way the nuclear genes work correct so
that's that's sort of what I was
alluding to that maybe there's
epigenetic elements to and how it
affects the mitochondria where someone
with a genetic risk to a cancer don't
have it because they're in this
conversation their m con is much let's
just keep the language simple healthier
due to epigenetic reasons right so uh as
I said when you have uh dysfunctional
mitochondria
chronically uh enogen turn on and enogen
will then upregulate the Transporters
for getting glucose and glutamine in
through the glycolysis glutaminolysis
Pathways so they are
facilitators of the problem in the
mitochondria so the mitochondria turns
on these facilitators and the
mitochondria defect then causes the
somatic mutations in the nucleus that
you see so all of this is related to
mitochondrial function and you it's very
difficult to get cancer if your
mitochondria healthy we that's why we
have never found a cancer that has that
that has normal and functional
mitochondria how is that measured I I
still clinically don't have a good way
of measuring healthy or unhealthy or
just measuring the health of
mitochondria am I missing something am I
not looking at the right place or is
there or it doesn't exist no no it's
without tissue biopsy of course yeah
yeah well tissue biopsy will let you
know if there's structural abnormalities
but don't forget most of the
Pathologists don't do electron
microscopy on the pathology they just
look at the how many mitotic figures you
have in the tissue to give you some
estimate of how how malignant it might
be it's low grade high grade you know
one to four these GLE nine things they
they they all have a different uh
quantitative or some estimate of of what
they see in the biopsy tissue that they
but they're not looking at mitochondria
health for sure they're they're just
looking at cell proliferation rates and
what what are you going to get from
looking at mitotic figures can you can
you give me some quantitative thing and
that's you know purely a judgment call
as well that's another I have a big
section of my book about how bad this
judgment is oh my God it's all
subjective and and and the way things
are going and there's already ai ai
involvement in in prostate cancer called
arterial AI um it's going to it's going
to be more uh more effective in figuring
out what prostate cancer a and what's
the real staging from this perspective
that we're talking about well for us it
doesn't make any difference because if
you pull the pl so a stage a glein six
is lowrisk disease and prostate cancer a
glein higher than six let's say nine is
very aggressive from your perspective a
glein 6 and a glein 9 is all the same
from a mitochondrial perspective I guess
I I would say the glein six may have
more mitochondrial function than the
glein 9 yeah this so the glein 9 will be
more fermentative than the glein six so
we're B on of fermentation and of course
is there a way of quantifying that and
is there are there any labs or
commercial Labs that we can look look at
you know this whole thing about liquid
biopsy is is coming to be the new thing
but it's not quite accurate enough right
now to be you know solid there might be
some false negatives and false positives
plus they're not are they looking at
mitochondri function or I I don't get no
they're not right they would be looking
at certain markers uh um Shed from the
tumor cell either from the m bra from
The genome itself right right right
you're looking for some particular
markers uh but you're not going to be
looking at we haven't I I so far there's
not enough work on the on metabolic
signatures that you might see in the
bloodstream think that I think that
could be crucial for clinicians to look
at we're working to get rid of it so you
don't have to do that stuff in the first
place good luck with that that's that's
the metabolic therapy that's why we have
guy tanom and all these other guys that
go on these incredible only fast and
take the the glutamine Inhibitors and if
they don't have the
tumor then what what are we going to do
you know if I had prostate cancer and I
did metabolic therapy and it went away
now the the way you know it goes away is
that if you do uh pet scan in Bones
because as you said when it comes out of
the prostate and starts becoming
metastatic you can pick up the lesions
outside the prostate gland itself so
when you have uh prostate cancer that's
now in the bones uh and outside the
gland now you know you're you have a
much less probability of doing well um
but we can kill those cells they're
glute those are glutamine Hogs like you
can't believe so we can t we can knock
them out I want to make it sound like
this is simple but when you understand
the biology if you really understand 40
Years of deep biochemistry on it what
the the that what you're seeing is is AB
absolutely predictable
whether your studies or anything that
you can cite that said that look because
we certainly know that your work from a
preclinical perspective talk about your
clinical perspective I know it's related
mostly to gleo blastomas and brain
cancer and breast what have you seen
breast and Lung and prostate breast and
lung as well and
prostate and all oh okay all of them so
and who's collecting the the P but
you've you've written mostly I I have
maybe I've missed it I haven't seen you
write or anyone from your group write
about prostate cancer and ketogenic diet
I wrote a big puff piece for nature on
on prostate cancer okay for nature when
was that that was like two years ago it
was two two groups uh started Steve
friedland's group uh and there was
another Steve is out at USC I think or
UCLA he's been working on the metabolic
management of prostate glance cancer for
quite quite quite a number of years oh
Steve friedin yes he has uh he's a
urologist right at uh at UCLA he's
people on on uh on uh he's had people on
a very carb about 20 gram a day which by
the way broccoli alone is 10 grams of of
of of carbs so yeah well this is the
thing but you he's not hammering the
glutamine so you got you got once you
start hammering that glutamine the
results are going to be far better and
you don't have to be you know
persecuting yourself with this stuff now
let me ask you this what you're
suggesting correct me if I misinterpret
anything is get the leave the glutamine
out well anytime you have anything
that's a protein particularly uh any
animal products but even things that are
non animal glutamine acid not a protein
correct so when you eating a protein
most proteins they contain glutamine
glutamine is Essen an essential nutrient
is it essential amino acid I believe it
is one of the eight or nine no it's not
essential it's cons it's not essential
so your body can make what it
needs and it's a essential for multiple
things immune system brain function the
aligning of the gut most people actually
often times prescribe glutamine for gut
health and things like that absolutely
so a are you suggesting that we should
stay away from glutamine at all cost
certainly supplementation but even foods
that are high in glutamine and B um what
do we do with the the healthy elements
of or is it just something the body
makes because it's not essential no
that's why we wrote the press pulz uh
therapeutic strategy for managing cancer
and and uh Dr George Yu who's a prostate
cancer uh oncologist is one of the
authors on the paper so along with Joe
maroon he's out of hopkins's he's out of
Annapolis but he works out of Hopkins as
well he has a lot of colleagues that
work with him at at John's Hopkins
George you do you see it on the page you
can you can he does mostly prostate
cancer um he's one of the co-authors on
the paper but what we did is we we have
to press you can press glucose down
because the body can switch over to
ketones to replace glucose that's what
we did with the epilepsy that's how we
knew all that stuff so you wouldn't go
unconscious you could push blood sugars
down really really low as long as
ketones are there to give the brain the
Alternative Energy so but do we give do
we do we achieve so is the goal to reach
to a ketogenic level that you can
measure you could do that either through
a ketogenic diet or fasting those are
the two methods there um or or is it
unrelated to ketogen ketogenesis and
just related to keeping the glutamate
the glutamine down and the glucose down
well what what what is do we need to be
at a ketogenic uh you know which is
measurable through strips and things do
do we want that to be is that the goal
the goal is two steps number one you
bring the P patient into nutritional
ketosis which is a GK glucose Ketone
index which we published a quantitative
measure to allow cancer patients I did
it for cancer patients but now I see all
the these young healthy guys all wanting
to get low gki because their
mitochondria get super healthy when
they're burning ketones so you said how
do I keep my mitochondria healthy you
burn the ketones and they and exercise
yes exercise absolutely exercise and
ketones this is the normal state of
humans we existed in in nutritional
ketosis for the most of our existence on
the planet so so we're just bringing
ourselves back to this new state and of
course the tumor cells start to grow
very slowly some of them will die but
then we pulse just like just like you
said Gio you can't be too aggressive
with the glutamine it's so essential so
we pulse it um we just give small doses
at strategic times while holding the the
bar on the low glucose so you hit the
tumor super sensitive to the targeting
of the glutamine the immune cells uh
just slow down they don't die when you
target their glutamine the immune cells
will just become somewhat paralyzed like
coma to or just but they're not dead the
tumor cells die so you got to pull the
drug off and allow the system the immune
system to recover to pick up the dead
corpses that are dead from the the low
glucose and the targeting the glutamine
and then you so what you have is the
tumor goes down you pull the glutamine
back and the glutamine targeting and and
the tumor grows just a little bit more
and then you hit them again so you're
you're allowing the body to recover and
rejuvenate between the glutamine pulses
the glutamine drug pulsing and the
tumors just get hammered and and you
take this aggressive tumor you either
get rid of it or you bring it into a
very dormant indolent kind of a state
but this is again dosage timing and
scheduling this is the where we are
today in eventually eventually having
the most successful opportunity to
manage cancer how do we schedule time a
a and pulse this dosage at what dosage
timing and scheduling is maximally
appropriate for killing tumor cells
while maintaining the health of the gut
the health of the immune system the Ura
cycle and all the things you said are
important you really need to know
General body physiology you need to know
biochemistry and you need to know how
bodies respond individually to these CH
challenges and this is why each person
becomes their own control because what
these toses timing and scheduling may be
have to be tweaked differently for each
person depending on their physiological
condition that's why we can't throw
thousands of people into a clinical
trial give them the same thing or for
it's not going to work every person has
to be judged on their own blood work on
their own physiology their own health
and then we design the doses timing and
scheduling and how we do this so
normally we take the patients not me
because I'm not a physician but my
colleagues we bring them on to a very
low carbohydrate diet for 10 to 14 days
and then we use the gki the glucose
Ketone index is that through is that
through fasting or through just a high
fat diet um it a zero carb diet doesn't
even have to be high fat you can eat
fish you can eat meat you eat small
amounts of vegetables your body again
all these things have carbs all
vegetables have yeah when very little
you're not talking a lot you're using
the gki as a quantitative measure to
determine when you hit the Zone which is
2.0 or below so when the patient the gki
are the strips that people can purchase
even online right Amazon yeah you can
get it's called keto Mojo and don't
forget keto Mojo right the the field is
moving uh rapidly for free Libra these
blood sugar monitors that will just
stick on your arm you don't have to be
proing your finger anymore and I
understand that the industry is starting
to make some sort of free Libra for
ketones as well so free Libra is called
yeah well that's the that's what the
name of the glucose monitor is called
right now it's a if they call it free
Libra it's a I I think they're not used
to be needed a prescription but I think
they you're going to be able to buy them
in the in the pharmacies and you you'll
be able to do the okay so it's not it's
not measuring ketones it's measuring
blood yeah there there are a few
companies that Dexcom is another there
are few companies that measure blood
glucose once see the thing about keto
Mojo is you most of these glucose meters
give it in deciliter milligram per decal
decaliter deciliter and and the ketones
are in millimolar so you have to divide
the glucose by deciliter by 18 and then
you get the Millar value and then you
can do the division to get your gki
value so keto Mojo made a so people
don't even have to take out the pen and
pencil and do the calculation right they
just push the button it gives you the
number it's a good product yeah yeah so
so once you get into the 2.0 and Below
now you know you've gradually
transitioned the body slowly to this new
this new metabolic State allowing your
brain and phys I'm telling you addicted
to glucose it's not easy going from what
it takes about a week yeah to adapt you
don't feel well as a result of your your
brain adapting to uh using ketones for
energy and not glucose I tell you it's a
very you feel flu like you have the flu
or well that's if you do it the wrong
way there's a right way to do it too you
can do it on a nice big bone in ribeye
as well you
know you just got to know how to do it
God you're killing my plant-based
doctors who are uh who I've had on who
are you know Dean ornish for example I
don't want to um you're causing problems
well listen that's their problem that's
not my problem you know that you want to
get you want to you want to manage your
cancer that's your choice right KN one
on a banana is not going to help you you
know uh um but listen uh vegans can get
into these zones too uh they just got to
be chewing on stuff all day long you
know it's not like we didn't evolve to
be eating plants alone let's be honest
we have to go back to our evolutionary
existence wow that is um an area that uh
well I'm always in conversation and it's
almost like religional affiliations
right oh yeah but that's only because
we're all fat and happy today during the
during the Paleolithic period getet the
vegans would have been exter they would
have been extinct let's put it that way
not that I have anything against vegans
I mean just do it if you're GNA do it do
it the right way and get enough protein
without the glutamine I mean I have by
the way if you're vegan by definition
your glutamine intake your your your
sugar intake glucose intake may be very
high actually often times it is actually
but your your glutamine intake might be
really low just by you're you're
consuming less protein which probably is
another problem well exercise will also
lower glutamine so you can lower
glutamine by interesting yeah oh yeah
how is that I I I don't know that I knew
that yeah that was done by George kahel
a good friend of mine who passed away he
was the head of the Jon diabetes center
down here in Boston so he and I would
talk for hours and hours about all this
stuff because he did a lot of these
basic studies down here at Boston and uh
he said exercise lowers blood glutamine
because the liver's taking it up and
they're using it for other things so
it's in the but you fascinating you
can't get down uh really to the lowest
levels without a little push from one of
these glutamine inhibitor drugs
and you got to use it very strategically
and very carefully otherwise you're
going to damage your gut you're going to
damage some so again you have to know a
little bit about human physiology and
what's good for one person and I I don't
want to say that vegetarians can't do
this they they get a low gki on a
vegetarian meal and then you come in
with the glutamine targeting drugs in
the right strategic way they're going to
respond just as well as the carnivore
guys it's just whatever your body is
more capable of doing to get into the
low to the G Ki value I'm just saying we
did not evolve to eat plants only I'm
just saying that humans will eat
anything that walks crawls or flies on
this planet let's be honest yeah they'll
dig up and eat tubers and I mean you
have to go back to our existence but
we're not the we anybody people always
ask me what can I eat I don't know eat
whatever the hell you want if you get a
low gki then you're in the right Zone if
I period end the story so what we're
trying to ultimately accomplish is to
have a to to to have a low gki is that
shortterm long term let's say I have a
low gki to this week next week not too
low do we know like for how long is
it forever that we need to have a low
gki what's your your guess on that we
published the GBM patient Pablo Kelly uh
who had a GBM came to me we have five
years of of gki measurements daily daily
five years of daily measurements can you
believe it so we were able to predict
these ratios and on on the on how
patients responded to to the cancer uh
so we were able to see using non
invasive Imaging to see how how GK could
be linked to how fast your cancer grows
so now don't say you know people say oh
I get a low gki um you know if you do
exercise and get your gki down some
people the cancer goes away goes away
other people it becomes remarkably
indolent and then it's uh it's open to
attack by surgery so you can just debulk
it remove it you look at it oh well six
months go by a year goes why the damn
thing is still there I see this light up
or whatever it is by some Imaging but
it's not going anywhere it's not getting
bigger it's not getting smaller it's
just there so not yeah not bothering
anyone well in Pablo's case uh when he
had it debol he had an inoperable tumor
that's now been operated on three times
you got to love it so you know these
guys oh inoperable inoperable he goes on
metabolic therapy all of a sudden the
damn thing is operable now now he he
thought he was out of the woods and the
the the physician neurosurgeon said I
think we got it all this time and at
first they said oh if we did it at first
we would never be able to get it all now
we think he got it all so he went back a
little bit off his traditional metabolic
diet and all of a sudden we see the damn
thing growing again on the on the pet
scan on the on the MRI image in the
brain put the fear of God back into him
all of a sudden he's back doing the and
all of a sudden you see the tumor go
back again so what what he did and what
most people should do is based diet and
their dietary approach or lifestyle
because exercise Done Right can reduce
gki as well right oh yeah and you're
you're trying to hit that 2.0 or less by
any means necessary kind of thing yeah
and and again it's everybody's know a
lot of folks come in and they've got
type two diabetes high blood pressure
hypertension they got all kinds of
things so we do a full full work up on
the blood and find out how far the
markers are from what we would consider
normal ranges and then as we bring the
patient more and more into a lower gki
all of a sudden triglycerides go down
HDL goes up oh yeah and then once that
patient gets in now they're open for the
glutamine targeting and one of the drugs
that we also work with is endol which is
a parasite medication you know I love
the way it works in this country uh you
can go to India and get endol is a
deworming kind of a drug and you pay
about 50 cents for the tablet and in our
country once we realize it has a effect
on cancer it's now $300 a tablet you got
to love our system so right so and and
so you use or you as part of the
protocol is to use endol for so why so
people say why the hell are you using
endol if you know the biology in
Biochemistry of
parasites parasites used fermentation
metabolism to stay
alive so it inhibits uh glutamine yeah
they're fermenting the goddamn glutamine
so so it's a glutamine inhibitor uh uh
and bendol okay I didn't know that so is
that the is that the and not it's it's
blocking glucose and glutamine both now
the problem is it's a mild inhibitor
it's not a big hammer the dawn drug six
deoxy norleucine is the big hammer
that's the one that really shuts the
glutamine down and that's the what's it
called six deoxy norleucine it's called
dond d n that was used years ago for
cancer management in the clinic but like
anything if you don't know the biology
and biochemistry of what the hell you're
doing uh you're not the outcome is not
going to be optimal so what they were
doing was giving patients a large amount
of this Dawn drug and it was causing a
lot of different toxicity to the gut uh
to the immune right let's be honest so
and they weren't targeting glucose they
weren't putting their patients into low
gki so they said oh this is no good and
you can't make money on it because it's
can't be patented so you can't make
money on it using it the wrong way okay
we don't want to use it anymore they
should bring that damn drug back because
now we know how to use it and it could
be a tremendous therapy keeping these
cancer patients alive once they're in in
low low gko we know what we need to do
it's just that the system doesn't
understand what the hell I'm talking
about after a while you say to yourself
maybe I'm
nuts so so what are some natural ways
without edaz all or Dawn just because
it's either very expensive in the
country or hard to get a get get have
access to
um is it as simple as find out foods
that are high and lower the intake of of
glutamine and certainly no supplements
with glutamine and glucose wise very low
carb diet because even if you consume a
plant-based diet with no sugar and no
you know processed foods that turns even
if it's a carbs after a certain amount
that turns into sugar as well well into
glucose again well that'll that'll
elevate your gki so so the gki as a
quantitative measure to know what you
can and cannot eat in what zone and then
your knowledgeable oncologist that
should be know this would be working
with you as an individual and looking at
your gki and image non-invasive Imaging
to see where you are on your on your
checkups and your and the patient and
the bottom line is how do you feel oh
the guy said I feel pretty good okay you
know I'm not suffering from any horrible
s this immu this what are the what are
they use in this and the hormone stuff
this terrible what do they use for
managing prostate cancer so Advanced
prostate cancer they use andren
deprivation therapy which is Lupron or
you know these other things Barone and
and all these
drugs chemical chemical castration yeah
that well that's because you're you lack
knowledge okay anybody who does that to
another human being lacks knowledge so
and that's what I talk about and the
poor people get offended and that's
their problem you know I'm looking at
this stuff from a biochemical Ang I know
what you should do and what you
shouldn't do now we don't say oh we can
cure cancer with metabolic therapy I
don't say that if you can stay alive
much longer with a higher quality of
life that's success if it comes back and
eventually kills you 10 years later you
did better than you would have done if
you were taken that crazy Androgen stuff
you know and I wrote that in my puff
piece I I said that I said this is nuts
you can't be doing this where did you
write that I wrote it I said it's in
nature oh yeah yeah article in nature
sure I'm going to pull it yeah article
in nature and it was talking about
friedland's work in another group and
they were both using carbohydrate
restriction they were getting very good
results but the problem is they're not
targeting the glutamine to get the
optimal effect good
results very very difficult to stay on
such a diet they they were really they
used the wrong diet okay wrong diet if
you they use the Atkins type of diet
well that's not good either
uh we is you can eat whatever you want
just get your gki down you're not G
period in the story that's that's yes
you could do that through intermittent
fasting I I I do uh I do for example the
uh uh fasting mimicking D once quarter
and my gki and also you can take some uh
like my my good friend and colleague
Dominic de austino yeah who's building
some Ketone supplements can make it a
little bit easier for do they taste any
better they used to tastes pretty nasty
it's still they're still working on
that well I'm not doing it I'm not doing
it I I'll stick to the diet and I'll
stick to fasting yeah well I agree and
they're making a lot of um keto Foods
you know I've tasted some of them and Jo
low gki well only if bars and keto eat
one a week uh peanut butter cups and
things but yeah no eat one a week and
you'll get into the
G not not three no no no you know when I
I did that water only fasting to get to
see if I could get uh to do it you know
just say it's hard when you just go call
Turkey it's brutal so they these
companies always giv me some keto food
to test and say what I think and all
this kind of stuff so I had one of these
muffins from some company I can't
remember the name it was the worst damn
muffin I ever ate in my life and it was
like eating cardboard right some stupid
thing yeah yeah exactly so I tell you
after three I after three days was my
the game was my myself and a good friend
our wives told us you guys talk you
can't do anything so I I said okay I'll
try it and see what it was like after
three days man I it was like you're
looking at your pet in a different way
you know
so you see your pet walking you see like
a a a piece of meat or turkey you know
medium rare yeah you see a food
commercial come on TV and that's
important thing you've seen all day yeah
exactly exactly so anyway I I broke my
fast eating that same that muffin
that keto muffin I'm telling you man it
was the best muffin I ever ate in my
life I was getting crumbs and all over
the floor on the walls yeah I mean I
mean it depends when you're hungry uh
and and I mean we've been weaned on
these hamburgers and chalupas and all
this makes it now we eat something
that's really close to being more
natural we don't want it it tastes
terrible so your view and your mind
Chang as it relates to food your
Cravings go away yes so that that yes
when you say oh that ketogenic diet is
so unpalatable well well Anthony chaffy
and some of these other they eat the
bone in prime rib for crying out loud
they get into low gki that's not soad
butter on the top of it isn't that a
high protein diet and you could go
through gluconeogenesis and convert
these proteins to glucose yeah but it's
not you're using the gki as a measure so
period that's it that's that's it always
go comes down to that yes it comes down
to that and you know gez I ate too much
of the of the bone in ribeye maybe I
have to back off a little bit on the
next maybe I'll have a smaller piece
this time than the big ass thing that I
ate before so and everybody comes to
know their own physiology and you do it
with the foods that you like to eat you
just have to eat a little bit less of
them until you get to the low gki so it
doesn't have to be torture and that's
and and low gki just to for clarity
purposes that is only measuring the that
the fact that you have low glucose
creating ketones yes nothing to do with
the glutamine no nothing to do with the
glutamine and and but if is there
something to measure glutamine yeah well
you can measure it in your blood but the
problem is it's it's the most abundant
amino acid in our body and it's there
more abundant than anything and but the
cancer cells I would say and if you
exercise you have a low GL gki and you
do a lot of good aerobic exercises you
can lower that glutamine down even
further and some people but you can't
measure it you can't have a Baseline and
measure to see you know I'm sure there's
te technology to do that but it's not
going to be simple for the guy at the
house to do and maybe maybe in the
future there will be some way to do this
but but again you know the bottom line
is is your tumor growing is it not
growing is it getting smaller how do you
feel what's your gki and then if you
take endol on top of that and you start
to see greater shrinkage and as I said
the only the reason why the the
parasites because many people mistake
they say cancer is a parasite no
parasites and cancer are different
species all different altogether the
cancer is coming from a human or a mouse
or a rat the parasite is a different
organism infesting infecting these
organisms but the parasite uses the same
metabolic pathway a very similar
metabolic pathway as the tumor cell so
if I'm killing the parasite with the all
of a sudden I see the damn tumors going
down I said what the hell's going on
with that nobody could figure it out
because we showed it's a they're
fermenting glutamine it's a glutamine
fermentation system they're using
mitochondrial substrate level phosphor I
don't want to go down to that P but
that's what the mechanism of action of
what's Happening Here so once you
understand that then you know how to
kill these cancer cells and and and and
you can kill them in a variety of ways
this guy did it that way he did it this
way the bottom line is the damn thing is
indolent it's not growing as fast and
that's ultimately what you're out
looking
for
fascinating Dr CED um I you've been very
generous with your time been it's such
so much in that I've gathered my brain
is frying right now I'm going to go look
up some of these papers because I've
applied many of the concepts I do
believe in the metabolic aspect of
cancer including prostate cancer I've
had very little success with ketogenic
with patients maybe because I didn't
prescribe it the right way and
particularly those that you know one of
the things that increases the risk of
development of prostate cancer and
progression once you're diagnosed is
high BMI yes related to just a lot of
body fat so in those cases I put them on
a ketogenic diet particularly because
I'm very interested in getting a twof
fur perhaps whatever it does to the
cancer never really went hard on the
glutamine aspect of things which is uh
that's going to be an area really going
to look hard at and I may talk to fredin
and yeah see if he wants to collaborate
something I think once use fredman's
well he's right with the glucose no
question about it and the cancer cells
can't burn ketones so that you know
that's helping the normal cells now
cancer cells can't use fatty acids or
Ketone bodies because they're mitochondr
defective so if you can get your
patients into a low G gki then you know
endol Fen bendol is another one of these
things you can start giving the patients
this and see how they respond and then
you have a a lot of ways to assess
whether you have success or not so but
you know water only fasting works really
well you should interview guy tanom he
he's the guy with the ma the advanced
prostate cancer who who did it all by
water only fasting and exercise so he
has a lot of he was one unhealthy
individual and now he's much healthier
without the prostate cancer I will get
to him um I have gentleman that runs a
fasting clinic in Foria that we've been
yeah communicating um any event a North
North Star I know that place yeah
Northstar yeah um so yeah we I've been
meaning to have him uh on the podcast
the gki can get down and if you can't
get it down by the diet you're eating
jump into water only fasting it'll go
down and the other thing and then how do
you keep it down well do you you can't
fast forever no you can't and that's why
you have to keep your that's why you
have to judge you can judge for yourself
what you should or should not eat how
you can eat it right and and and this is
not supposed to be comfortable you can
have the choice okay it's either either
this or the radiation and the poisonous
chemicals those Androgen things you're
given so let the patient make their
decision let them choose what they would
want to do see what you get yeah yeah it
becomes very very tricky because a lot
of people have the mentality of look I
need to do something physical to this
period end of story that's just a
mentality thing or just you know the
system the medical system um in my world
so as you know I'm faculty at NYU have
an amazing relationship with everyone
where if they're going to get their
prostate out they're going to get their
prostate out you know hormone therapy is
always a little tricky for me I'd rather
my patients not be on horm theapy but
this is part of how they treat Advanced
prostate cancer so I'm trying to do
other things to help them counter some
of the side effects of hormone therapy
as we try to do to do things for their
well this is their cancer as well I
think this is the way it'll work you
have to have some hybrid system because
the guys doing the endr and stuff are
going to feel bad if you told them you
don't want to do that anymore they're
going to get like I make it stuff
you get fired as a patient yeah well you
know I mean this is like this is the
system that prevents flexibility so if
you have the rock hard science like I
have and you're not implementing that in
the clinic what's the reason for that
there must be something other than
patient outcome that's preventing you
from doing this so patients have to make
the decision do they they should be the
ones rattling the cages the hell man I
want metabolic therapy well we don't
know that cancer cells don't need they
use fat and these guys don't know so
I'll talk to them you know and try to
educate once you read the papers it just
gets me frustrated people I they can do
this I test everything I did it all I I
know what I'm looking at we've we've
interrogated these cells like you can't
believe even torturing the things
torturing the cells right right so
anyway I I'll let you go but it was
great speaking with you I I likewise how
can people get in touch they need to I
don't think you patient you made that
clear I kits of information out to the
cancer patients I can't tell anybody
what to do what not to do all I can tell
them is if you read this information you
become more knowledgeable than you were
you can ask important questions to your
oncologist and then you get slapped down
that's where they get the slap in the
face that oh cancer cells the glucose
has nothing to do with cancer c walk out
of that guy's office he's clueless he
has no clue what the hell he's talking
about so do you have a website where you
have a list of papers that people can no
I I it's all open access on the web so
you just put my name you'll get all the
papers out because we publish open
access anybody who has a computer can
read the papers we get all of our
donations from private foundations and
philanthropy uh we're always excited to
know that there are some good people out
there that want to see the Paradigm
changing for the good of humanity and
they don't really care whether they're
going to make a billion dollars on what
we're doing so we just know we're
keeping a lot of people alive for a
longer period of time and that's our
measure of success is that guys that
should be that should have been dead are
walking around and Brad Brad and Maggie
Jones are collecting all of the
different cancer patients I think
there's some prostate in there brain
colon breast all what they call stage
four terminal cancer patients and
they're making a big documentary movie
on this and there'll be a couple of more
documentary on our stuff coming out in
the future some Hollywood people are
interested in this so it's coming it's
coming slowly but it's happening it's a
paradigm change in the way we're going
to manage cancer for the benefit of the
way and the health and and the other
thing too is hypertension blood as you
said diabetes all these things start
going away with your tumors and uh it's
just a regeneration of of Health keeping
your mitochondria healthy it's all about
the mitochondria it's all about the
mitochondria absolutely thanks so much
Dr cfre look I I hope to have you on the
audience doesn't know this yet but I'm
hosting a prostate cancer Summit that's
going to be revolutionary in terms of
the kind of speakers that we'll have and
so I hope to have you there and I'll be
in touch with regards to that and thank
you so much for being on I appreciate
all the wealth of information you shared
with us oh thank you very much you know
it was very nice to be here thanks thank
you thank you for everyone for listening
for watching if you're watching a great
episode with Dr C freed of course and I
hope you got a lot from it but I think
the future of prostate cancer when we
look at it it a lot has to do with the
metabolic approach to it for sure so
stay tuned for the research on my end on
that regard so thank you for watching
much love Dr Gio here signing off I'll
talk to you next time thanks for tuning
in to this week's episode episode of the
Dr Goo podcast you can watch all
episodes of this podcast and much more
by subscribing to my YouTube channel on
youtube.com/ Geo Espinosa ND if you love
what you heard today you can help by
leaving a five-star review of the
podcast on Apple and Spotify as each
review helps us reach more men who are
serious about improving their Urological
health and how to function better better
with age and for the latest research and
actionable takeaways in the world of
men's health and integrative Urology
sign up for my newsletter at Dr geo.com
I'll see you next time